---
layout: post
title: Length contraction in two space dimensions
---
This post contemplates the problem of length contraction in special relativity, using an example. While usually the fenomenon is introduced to students in one spatial dimension, it is interesting to consider a case with two spatial dimensions. The intended audience is familiar with the basics of special relativity, in particular with the Lorentz transformation in 3 dimensions. 
**SPOILER ALERT: Expect rotations!**
### A quick note on notation
The convention used here is quite standard but for clarity's sake worth specifying anyway. For a transformation from a stationary reference frame $$(ct, x, y)$$ to a reference frame $$(ct', x', y')$$ moving away at velocity $$v$$ along the $$x$$ axis, the Lorentz transformation is given by:  
$$  
\left( \begin{matrix} ct' \\ x' \\ y' \\ \end{matrix} \right) =
\left( \begin{matrix} \gamma & -\gamma\beta & 0 \\ -\gamma\beta & \gamma & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{matrix} \right)
\left( \begin{matrix} ct \\ x \\ y \\ \end{matrix}\right)
$$.  
The coefficients $$\beta, \gamma$$ are:
$$\gamma = \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{1-\dfrac{v^2}{c^2}}}, \beta = v/c$$.  
Of course, $$c$$ is the speed of light in a vacuum (we assume everything here happens in a vacuum, because physics is hard enough already).

### What was length contraction again?
Anyone who has studied special relativity has heard of the fenomenon of length contraction. But we may be dusty on the details, so let's recap quickly.  
Simply put, an object's length is shorter when the object is moving along this length relative to the reference frame in which it's being measured. Let's consider a simple example in one spatial dimension, to wrap our minds around that abstract sentence. If Alice measures a resting Bee and gets the length $$L$$, when the Bee starts flying away with velocity $$v$$, Alice will measure it's length to be shorter!  
Specifically, it will be equal to $$\dfrac{1}{\gamma}L$$.  
I hope that none of this is surprising to you, so far, even though special relativity is oficially mind-bending. If need be, you can pause and refresh your memory so that you can be comfortable with this basic concept, before we go on.

# So how about two spatial dimensions?
Let's dig in a little deeper and consider a more complex situation. Let's introduce an inertial observer, Carl, who sees the following situation: Alice is hovering on a platform with an upward velocity $$v_a$$ relative to Carl. In the meantime, the Bee is travelling on a hoverboard horizontally relative to him, with a velocity $$v_B$$. There is a hole in Alice's platform which Carl measures to have length $$L$$. In his reference frame also the Bee's hoverboard has length $$L$$. So according to him, the Bee on the board will be able to pass through Alice's platform.  
But wait, the board is moving along it's length relative to Carl. So he sees it as shorter than the Bee sees it. Moreover, in the Bee's reference frame, it's Alice and her platform that are moving toward the bee with velocity $$-v_B$$ (in addition to the component coming from $$v_A$$). So not only is the resting length of the Bee's board $$>L$$, the hole in Alice's platform is also $$<L$$. Can that be right? If the board passes through the hole in Carl's reference frame, surely it also has to do so in all other intertial reference frames? If it didn't, there would exist a priviliged reference frame, which is against the assumptions of the theory of relativity! So is the theory wrong or can we save it?  

# Setting up Carl's reference frame
Lets set up Carl's reference frame so that his coordinates $$(0, 0, 0)$$ describe the spacetime event when the Bee's board's left ($$BL$$) end meets the left end of the hole in Alice's platform ($$AL$$). Of course their right ends ($$AR, BR$$) meet at the same time. In other words, at Carl's time $$= 0 $$, the board is passing through the hole. We can propose the following description for the coordinates of $$AL, BL, AR, BR$$:
$$
AL = \left( \begin{matrix} ct\\ 0 \\ v_A t \\ \end{matrix} \right),
AR = \left( \begin{matrix} ct\\ L \\ v_A t \\ \end{matrix} \right),
BL = \left( \begin{matrix} ct\\ v_B t \\ 0 \\ \end{matrix} \right),
BR = \left( \begin{matrix} ct\\ v_B t \\ 0 \\ \end{matrix} \right).
$$  
We see that at $$t_C = 0$$ the appropriate ends meet and the board is indeed passing through the hole. 
